Good morning everyone.
Very excited to have you all here today.
This is the first session of
our Tools of Track for the
Worldwide Developers Conference.
And we have a lot to
talk about this week.
We're highlighting tools
because Mac OS X creates such an
enormous range of opportunities.
Both in applications, drivers,
and in the tools themselves.
Now, we are all dependent upon tools.
You'll see tools through the entire show.
They're essential for all of us.
So we all know the difficulties
of working with the new operating
system with pre-release tools,
with tools that aren't quite ready yet.
and what we want to do is
we want to make Mac OS X the
premier developer environment.
To do that, Apple is very,
very serious about developer
tools and about making sure that
you have everything you need to
bring your applications to market.
In this session we're going to
cover our goals and strategy,
how we're going to get there,
we're going to give you an
overview of the Apple tools,
and we're going to give you a look
at the third party tools that are
coming available and some of which you
have in your bags at the show today.
And to start that,
I'm bringing to the stage Steve Naroff,
our Senior Director in charge
of Java and Cocoa development.
So I'm just going to take five minutes
and try and tell you what we're up to.
One thing that's really
important for everyone to hear,
sometimes I get emails, voicemails,
or just talk to folks in the
audience who really sometimes want
to understand whether Steve Jobs and
Avi Tavenian and other executives at
Apple are really committed to tools.
And the answer is yes.
And it's not just because it's the
right thing to do for you guys,
even though that is the prime motivator.
It's also because it's
just in their blood.
It's in my blood, it's in their blood.
And ever since I've been working
with the two of them for 15 years,
like Avi has worked with Steve,
tools have been a focus of
their work and of our strategy.
So I think you could be assured.
That A, we're making great progress
and I think you'll see that.
But B,
this is a long term proposition here.
This isn't something that's
going to change overnight.
So we want to participate, okay?
For a while there,
Apple wasn't participating
in this activity.
It was purely leaning on the third
party community for great tools.
The good news is,
even though we're participating,
even though we're investing,
even though I think
we're doing great work,
we are also embracing our third parties.
We work closely with Metrowerks,
we work closely with Borland,
we work closely with a lot
of the companies you're
going to hear about today.
And the simple fact is
we can't do it ourselves,
okay?
The space is too complex.
And the types of problems you guys are
solving are too broad for Apple to have
or to be the sole purveyor of tools.
So it's pretty clear
that that's our strategy,
okay?
So I'd like to close by... by saying,
and David Koehn.
One of the reasons we do tools
is to support our framework
and platform initiatives.
However, Carbon,
clearly Metroworks has been a
leader in the community for years,
again before we decided
to reinvest in tools,
so clearly Code Warrior is a superior
environment for doing Carbon development.
On the other hand,
if you're doing pure Java development,
when I say pure Java I mean
not programming to web objects.
Not programming to QuickTime and
so on and so forth,
but just doing swing development because
you need that cross-platform application,
then JBuilder is going to be
the sweet spot for that type.
For those of you who
were in the Java talk,
it's the moral equivalent of what
I was talking about in the Java talk,
which is decide where you fit in
terms of what you're trying to do.
You're going to make a
framework choice based on that.
Then you're going to make a tool
choice based on your framework choice,
or at least the framework choice might
be influenced by the tool choice.
All those things factor into the
path that you guys need to take.
Certainly many of you
have lots of legacy code.
In that case,
the answer is fairly simple.
I'm speaking to people
who are doing new things.
People doing new things have to
basically reflect on what it is
you are trying to accomplish and
make decisions based on that.
With that said,
I'm going to bring up Dave Payne.
He's one of my development
tools managers.
He's going to take you
through the details.
Hey Dave.
Thanks Steve.
Here you go.
The magic button.
Okay, many of you may have seen me before
here on stage at WWDCs in the past
speaking about developer tools.
I'm responsible for Project Builder,
the Compiler, Debugger and
Performance Tools for Mac OS X.
So we'll take a look at
[Transcript missing]
So with Project Builder you
can do all the development that
you need to do for Mac OS X.
So again there's a whole
variety of languages,
the primary languages that
we support on the system.
C, C++, Objective C, Java.
With these you can develop
for all of our frameworks,
Cocoa, Carbon, Java 2 as Steve showed you
in your previous session.
We've got a great Java environment.
And now WebObjects 5,
a full Java environment for WebObjects
that Builder with the new developer
tools CD provides support for that.
You can also do Unix development.
You can write tools or server daemon
processes that you might want to interact
with from graphical applications.
And then I/O Kit kernel extensions
and device drivers as well.
There was a question yesterday
about Objective C++ development.
So we are going to be
resurrecting Objective C++.
For the purpose of allowing
Cocoa applications to use
existing C++ libraries.
I'm not going to go into that
in detail in this session.
If you want to hear more about
that go to the compiler technology
session on Thursday morning.
But through all this technology you
can build the full array of things
that you'll need to do for Mac OS X.
Sometimes people ask us,
so is Project Builder real enough
that I can use it for big projects?
So we use it for all of
what we do for Mac OS X.
There's over 250 projects that
go into Mac OS X at Apple that
are using Project Builder today.
There's a lot of facilities in there
to really help with team development.
So of course every user has their
own preferences for the application.
But in addition, for each project,
each user has their
own settings for that.
So their own active build styles,
their own active target,
their own bookmarks,
their own breakpoints.
And all of this is integrated with
the CVS source code management system,
so you can really work
effectively as a team.
Unix has been known for a long time
as a great development environment in
terms of the sheer power underneath it,
but it's been very complex.
So again, Project Builder makes
things simple for you,
but there's a lot of
power that you can tap.
The GCC compiler,
we compile all of our code for
Mac OS X with this compiler.
So I've talked about that we
leverage a lot of open source tools.
We are working to actively
give back to the community.
We've started giving GCC patches
back to the Free Software Foundation.
We've signed the copyright assignment
agreement with GDB as well so that
we can do that with GDB changes.
So for example,
giving Objective C support
back in both cases.
Project Builder uses the Jam build tool,
but if you need to know about that,
then we're doing something wrong.
CVS version control,
the file merge utility uses diff,
so we take advantage
of a lot of this power.
So from the very beginning,
Project Builder has been designed
especially to develop for Mac OS X.
And in order to understand
Mac OS X development well and in order
to understand Project Builder well,
you really need to study and memorize
and learn the system overview manual.
Now you'll find this in HTML and
I believe even PDF on the system.
You can order hard copy
like this from Fat Brain.
There's a lot of concepts that
you'll hear about throughout
the week that are documented in
very good detail in this manual.
I'd highly recommend that you get a hold
of that and really study it in depth.
So for example, Project Builder builds
properly formed bundles.
This is all your application
packages themselves.
Plugins, frameworks.
Inside bundles, you can put multiple
localizations of an application.
So English, Japanese, German, French.
In fact, in the new developer CD,
we've got Project Builder
localized into Japanese.
But you've got to build bundles
in order to support this.
Project Builder, you can localize files
directly from there.
If you're using Carbon and
Carbon resource files,
Apple strongly recommends that
you know what you're doing.
You can now use flat data files to store
the resource manager resources in so
that you can store this in a file system
agnostic way for file systems like UFS or
NFS that don't support resource force.
Again, this is the default way that
Project Builder builds on Mac OS X.
We generate Maco binaries,
which is the primary format
for binaries on Mac OS X.
This provides you direct access to
all the systems that you're building.
This provides you direct access
to all the system APIs that
we've got throughout the system.
And that also enables full use
of all of Apple's Mac OS X tools.
Frameworks.
You'll hear a lot throughout
the week about frameworks.
It's a very fundamental
concept in Mac OS X.
These are Mac OS X's shared libraries.
So, for example, Project Builder itself,
the application is a very small
application that links with a couple
of large private frameworks and
a couple of smaller frameworks.
We've really factored the
application out in that manner.
Project Builder gives you full
access to all your system frameworks.
So, for inclusion and
searching of header files,
you get direct access to
pre-compiled headers for our
umbrella frameworks like Carbon and
Cocoa and application services,
core services.
As well as,
if you do finds across API documentation,
you see book icons that let you
go directly to the API for that.
You, of course,
can build your own frameworks
for your own applications.
And then Project Builder gives
you facilities to allow you to
test your application with your
development versions of the frameworks
without needing to install either
of them fully into the system.
So, you don't have to trash your working
versions that you may be depending upon.
Moving on to other tools,
you saw a great demo yesterday in
the keynote when Scott Forstall
showed you Interface Builder.
This is our user interface construction
tool for building Aqua compliant
user interfaces for Cocoa and Carbon.
There's a lot of great new support in
Interface Builder for what we call guides
that let you see exactly when you're
compliant with the ACWA guidelines.
A very powerful feature.
To learn more about that,
come to the Interface Builder
session this afternoon.
This is integrated with Project Builder
in that you can directly launch it from
Project Builder and move back and forth.
Interface Builder makes it very easy to
use Cocoa's outlets and actions paradigm.
So you can directly set
up your connections there.
And with Carbon,
you can create Carbon nib-based
applications with Interface Builder.
This really is the easiest way
to use the Carbon event model.
So you might find that useful as well.
[Transcript missing]
We've got a full suite of
performance analysis tools.
As you've heard,
the performance characteristics of
Mac OS X are much different than
those of Mac OS 9 in some cases,
so it's really important that you
use these tools and understand those
differences and optimize for X.
So there's a variety of categories
here to watch what your CPU is doing.
You can use tools,
the sampler graphical application
or its equivalent command line
tool sample to see where your
application is spending its time.
To examine what's going
on with your memory use,
we've got tools like malloc
debug and object alloc,
graphical tools for displaying where
in your application you're allocating
all your memory from and how many
objects you've got at various times.
There's also a set of command line tools,
heaps, leak and malloc history.
Check out the man page of malloc to
see information about malloc history.
For all of these tools,
go to the performance tools
session on Thursday afternoon.
Robert will give a great
demo at that point.
Quartz debug shows you really,
are you drawing too much on the screen?
Sometimes you'll be drawing the same
thing multiple times in the same place.
You don't even know it.
You can't tell,
but it's taking time away that could
be used for other things in the system.
FS usage for file system usage,
seeing what all calls you're making.
SC usage for system call.
VM map for VM usage.
Top for overall system
performance analysis.
We've got really a full suite here,
and it's important that
you take advantage of this.
So how do we deliver this?
On the Mac OS X Developer Tools CD.
So as you've seen,
we shipped this CD with Mac OS X.
We think it's really important
that we get the development tools
out there and widely available for
people to really start ramping up
on Mac OS X as quickly as possible.
I'm sure that you all are at
the leading edge of the curve.
We plan to do quarterly releases
of new Developer Tools CDs.
We're sort of still working
out the precise details here,
but as you've seen, the first quarterly
update here is at WWDC.
You should have all received
a new Developer Tools CD.
If you didn't, check downstairs.
Make sure you get one.
The CDs are free to all
ADC Premier and Select members,
and you'll also be able to
download the packages from the web.
The current CD packages
are not yet up there,
but should be soon.
So on the CD as a whole,
what all do you get?
So you get the developer
applications that I've talked about.
In addition,
you get the open source development tools
and the BSD tools from Unix underneath.
And you get what we
call the Mac OS X SDK.
So the headers for all
the system frameworks.
You get profile and
debug libraries so that,
for example, in Project Builder you can
switch easily to use a debug
variant of your frameworks.
So you can get more information about
what's going on inside the frameworks.
The debugger session on
Friday will tell more about that.
As I mentioned, you get sample code.
There's a lot of documentation
on the system and the tech pubs
people are hard at work creating
new documentation all the time.
And you've also got CarbonLib
SDK on the CD itself,
not in Mac OS X packages,
but out there so you can copy it
on if you're still doing CarbonLib
development for Mac OS X and 9.
So you get a lot of documentation
on the system and the tech pubs
people are hard at work creating
new documentation all the time.
And you've also got CarbonLib
SDK on the CD itself,
not in Mac OS X packages,
but out there so you can copy it
on if you're still doing CarbonLib
development for Mac OS X and 9.
8 and 9.
So what's new in the CD that
you got here at the conference?
So the primary theme of this CD was
support for WebObjects 5 development.
You can use this for all
development for Mac OS X.
There's some general
purpose enhancements,
but the primary theme is WebObjects 5.
Because WebObjects 5 is
a pure Java environment,
we've done some enhancements in
the Java support in this build.
And we'll tell a bit more details in the
project builder intro session and then
the Java sessions throughout the week.
Also on the CD, you do get the WebObjects
5 developer packages.
And in addition,
a time-limited license for
a restricted version of the
runtime so all of you can start
experimenting with WebObjects 5 today.
We don't plan to put that on
the CD forever in the future,
but this is a great
opportunity this time around.
There's new documentation,
additional examples.
So you'll find a new
performance manual out there.
This is very important again to study.
This one also you can
order from Fatbrain,
get hard copy.
It'll make the performance
characteristics of the system
a lot more understandable.
Also there's an accessing hardware
document for those of you writing
apps that you want to get directly
to characterizes the system.
It's a very useful document.
It's a very useful document to
understand the characteristics of
a device and a quartz primer to
understand the graphics system better.
In addition, updated API documentation
for Cocoa and Carbon.
And there was a bug in the original
developer tool CD that's been fixed
here so you can get directly to
the Carbon APIs help information
from project builder again now.
So with that, that's a quick summary.
Again,
there's lots of additional sessions,
project builder intro this afternoon,
but let me turn it back over
to Godfrey to learn more
about the third party tools.
Thanks, Godfrey.
Thank you very much, Dave.
Big hand for our development tools team.
They've done a tremendous amount of work
and obviously have a lot more to go,
and we're going to continue
to be upgrading those.
Let's talk now a little bit about our
third party tools and our collaboration
with third party tool vendors.
We work very closely with these people.
We give them engineering direction.
We give them engineering
assistance on a direct basis.
We seed them with early versions
of the operating system that none
of you in general would want to
run because they're too fragile.
We also help them with business
coordination so that our tool
strategy internally coordinates
well with their tools.
And that they have the right
things on target when we go
to market with our pieces.
Just thought I'd walk through and review
some of the tools that are currently
available for Mac OS X development,
many of whom you're well
familiar with already.
Absoft is doing their
Pro Fortran product.
They've got a Mac OS 9 version.
They've got a Mac OS X version in beta.
They tell me they'll probably be
GM about the end of June and be ready
for all of the science and technical
industry that has this huge code base,
millions and millions of
lines of Fortran code.
Metrowerk's with Code Warrior.
They're releasing here at the show,
you have in your bag,
the early access Pro 7 release.
And they have lots and
lots of enhancements.
I actually have the folks from
Metrowerk's here to talk about
their release and give us all
an update on their products.
Real Software with Real Basic to
answer the basic challenge.
They've had a GM Mac OS X application
for some time now and they've
done some updates and I have them
here to talk about that today.
Another category of tools that developers
need are installers and utilities.
We have both of our external
vendors of installers,
Aladdin Systems and MindVision,
with GM Mac OS X Ready products now.
So once you finish your development,
you can wrap it, you can package it,
you can deliver it to your customers.
Mathem Aesthetics has done a marvelous
job of updating Resorcerer and bringing
it to Mac OS X for all of you who
have been using traditional resource
manager resources for many years and
who have need for lots of new features,
Apple Script debugging and
all kinds of other things.
They've gone GM with the new version
of Mac OS X Resorcerer and they're here
with it at the show in the Exhibit Fair.
and then for the
Java specialists in the audience,
we're working very closely with Borland.
You have a new preview
of JBuilder in your bags.
Also, Zero-G with their install anywhere.
And VMGear with Optimizeit.
They're all ready for you.
They're coming up on Mac OS X in
the very near future.
So I think we have a very complete set.
These are only a sampling
of what's available.
There are many other tools available.
How many here have gone to
the exhibit fair already?
About three quarters of the
audience has their hands up.
I'd like everybody to go visit them.
We're running it all the way
through Wednesday this year.
So you should be able to visit and
talk with each of these people and
see how their tools meet your needs.
Now let's talk a little bit.
I'm going to have our friend
from Real Software come up.
Let's talk about the basic
challenge for a moment.
When you look at the industry,
when you look at the industry
journals and read what's out there,
you always hear that
there's three times as much,
four times as much software
for the Windows platform as
there is for the Macintosh.
And when you look in the industry
journal and look at the statistics,
what you find is that 60 to 80 percent
of the additional packages out there
are implemented with Visual Basic.
Why is it so successful?
Rapid application development
and ease of access.
Nearly anyone can learn Basic.
Well, we've had a big hole in this area
for a long time and now I think
we have a real contender to fill
it with a Mac OS X solution.
Let me introduce Lorin Rivers,
the product manager from Real Software.
Thank you, Godfrey.
Thanks for having me.
Thank you.
And, uh...
So Mac OS X is the present.
If you were here for Steve's
presentation yesterday,
talking about the likely adoption
of Mac OS X and how people who
are running Mac OS X feel about
running classic applications,
I think you got the message
about how important it is that
you also support Mac OS X.
Our relationship with Apple enabled
us to deliver Real Basic for
Mac OS X in February.
And through our collaboration with them,
we've also been able
to release two updates.
Our most recent one adds a lot
of support for the latest and
greatest Mac OS X functionality.
Mac OS X is not just for early adopters.
You know,
I'm a marketing guy and I'm running it.
And Mac OS X is not just
for people who are Luddites.
You know, it's got a lot of,
there's a lot of legacy software that
people need to continue supporting.
And this opportunity,
as Steve alluded to yesterday,
is very similar to the
introduction of the PowerPC.
If any of you were in the
Mac market at that time,
there were,
when Quark released QuarkXPress for
native for the PowerPC,
it really exploded.
And it was a great opportunity
for Quark to gain huge,
amounts of market share.
Real Basic runs on the Macintosh.
In fact, you can run it on a Quadra
660 AV running 7.6.1.
And it's not as fast as it is on a G4,
but it's certainly capable.
And the really cool thing about it
is that even if you're running on an
antique piece of hardware like that,
you can create a Mac OS X native
application with nothing special.
It'll just compile it for you.
So we run on Macintosh, Mac OS X,
and we compile for those two
as well as for that other OS.
And it's a great opportunity
for you to possibly expand
your market if you're able to,
without changes,
generate a Windows executable as well.
So, you know, create on the Mac,
deliver on three other platforms.
And Real Basic is compiled.
It's not basic like 10 Go To.
It's a modern version of
basic that uses the familiar,
you know,
object dot property kind of syntax.
It's professional strength.
There's plenty of commercial
developers using Real Basic.
It's completely object-oriented
from the ground up,
designed that way and very rigorously.
So, at the same time, you know,
sure it's basic,
but you have direct access to all
of the power of the underlying OS,
direct access to Mac toolbox calls,
PapiSheet shared libraries,
as well as the Win32
API through declares.
It supports SQL.
You can connect to almost
any database you might name.
We provide plug-ins.
And it uses a single
API to access all of them.
So you can do your development running
against Real Basic's native relational
database and then deploy on Oracle,
for example,
or OpenBase or FrontBase or any
of the other ones that we support.
Plus,
we have direct support for Apple events.
You can drag a compiled Apple script
right into your project and
access it quick time and plenty
of other great Apple technologies.
Why would you use Real Basic?
Well, you know,
Michael and his team at Microsoft use
Real Basic extensively for prototyping.
Every new feature that they add to the
new version of Office and to Explorer 5
was all prototyped in Real Basic.
Thank you, Michael.
Another example would be
MYOB account edge made in Real Basic,
but the engine was written in C.
And, you know, it's a very,
very complex engine.
And this tool allows MYOB adopters
to convert their crafty old
QuickBooks documents over to MYOB,
someone who's supporting the Mac OS.
The Real Basic also
provides a rich plugin SDK,
so say there's something
that Real Basic doesn't
provide you that you need,
you can write it in C.
You can write it in a cross-platform
fashion and access it very easily
from within Real Basic without
having to write a bunch of
special code inside of Real Basic.
Real Basic is a rapid application
development environment.
It's very similar to Interface
Builder in many ways,
except I can use it.
I'm a marketing guy again.
I have a degree in geography
with a minor in philosophy,
and I can use Real Basic.
I'm not stupid or anything,
but I'm certainly not
a computer programmer,
or at least I wasn't until
I started working in real software.
The really cool thing about it is
that it's an iterative process.
What you see is what you get.
You put some stuff in your window,
you test it to see if you like it,
you add a little more functionality,
and next thing you know
it's 4 in the morning,
and you've got bags under
your eyes the next day because
you're having so much fun.
So, Real Basic gives the ability
to be both productive and have
a great time using your tool.
Concentrate on the
value add that you have,
which is making great software.
Going forward,
we've got big plans for Real Basic.
We're enhancing the
performance of the compiler.
We're going to make much
smaller applications.
We plan to begin addressing other
operating systems and platforms
and also be able to create
plug-ins for other applications,
which is something I'm really
excited about because I think
it would be really fun.
So before I go on,
let me mention something real quickly.
You know, there's a couple of events in a
software company or a technology's
lifespan that are defining.
So one of them would be the
appearance of an O'Reilly book.
And, you know, you're really,
it's a validating event.
And that's really cool.
And this is a fantastic book.
If you're interested in getting
deep and dirty with Real Basic,
you can't do any better than this book,
which is going to have a
second edition out this summer.
Thank you.
last summer.
And that's all great, you know,
Riley stuff,
top-notch technological things, but...
But you know that you've
really arrived when there's a
Real Basic for Dummies book.
And actually the fact is,
this is a fantastic
introduction to Real Basic.
And it's a very well written book
and full of pithy information.
I encourage you to take a look at it.
So I want to show you around
a little bit in Real Basic.
What I want to do is show you how easy
it is to use Real Basic to go from,
like say you are a Real Basic developer,
to go from your old
Real Basic code to Mac OS X.
So here's Real Basic 2
running in Classic.
One thing I love about Mac OS X is
being able to do other things
while applications are launching.
I was an old Next user
and it really spoiled me.
So here's my Real Basic project.
This is actually,
this is version 1.2 of Real Bugs.
It's the tool we use to ask for our
customers to provide us with feedback.
So this is version 1.2.
I just dug around on my desk.
I had a two-year-old
version of the source.
You know, open it up, run it in classic.
Simply run and, you know,
you want to enter a summary.
You know, Real Basic, so rocks.
You know, and then you submit
this bug and it'll send,
it uses an Apple script to communicate
with the email program that you're using.
And sends us an email and then
we can automatically track
it and that kind of stuff.
And, you know,
you can see this looks like a standard.
Mac OS Platinum user interface.
And.
and what I'll do now is open
that same project in the
latest version of Real Basic,
which is Real Basic 3.
I'll just drag that same
Real Basic 2 project onto the icon,
run it, and...
and David It's a two year old project.
I hadn't run it in two years.
So, you know, it's just that easy and,
you know, creating it, you know,
people talk about eating
their own dog food.
We don't do that.
We eat our own caviar.
And we're using more and more of
Real Basic inside of Real Basic.
And this version of 3.2,
all of the lists are actually
Real Basic list boxes.
So it's a powerful motivator
to update and fix any,
you know,
missing features in your products.
So I want to thank Godfrey very
much for having me out today.
Thank you for your attention
and we get a lot of value out of
our relationship with Godfrey.
He's the bomb.
Thank you very much, Lauren.
Thank you, Godfrey.
No doubt.
So for more information about Real Basic,
Loren is here all week and he'll
be over in the exhibit fair.
There's some contact information.
You can find him.
And Real Basic has a birds
of a feather tonight.
And that's their URL so you can
find them easily on the web.
They deploy a lot of their software
via the web so you can download an
evaluation copy and just try it out.
See if it works for you.
Extremely useful product.
Tremendous capability
bringing apps to Mac OS X.
At this point in time I believe
there are about 40 or 50 applications
in the shareware domain that were
written with Real Basic and are
immediately native Mac OS X apps.
This is a great story.
Now,
I'm sure all of you are waiting for this.
I think it goes without saying that
95% of the Mac OS X commercial apps on
the market are made with Code Warrior.
So I felt it important to bring
them to talk with us today.
They're our leading third party
supplier of development tools and
we are working very hard to get
together on Mac OS X with them.
And to talk about that,
I'm bringing Matt Henderson,
the technical lead for Code Warrior,
to talk to you.
Thanks Godfrey.
Steve, you're on the phone.
Okay, so I'm here to talk to you
today about a number of things.
First off, I just want to say that we've
been on Mac OS X a long time.
We've been doing this,
I've been in charge of getting everything
on Mac OS X running and targeting
Mac OS X for almost two years now.
So,
Mac OS X with the release of public beta
and maybe with the release of final,
if you haven't moved your apps yet,
is new territory for you.
But it's,
we've absolutely been there from
the very beginning and it's been
a lot of great fun for us all.
So, in your show bag, speaking of that,
is your Code Warrior 7
Pro Early Access CD that has
our latest stuff for Mac OS X.
So if you haven't gotten that
CD out and tried to use it yet,
you should.
We've experienced,
I'm going to cover everything in depth,
but it's an across the board
improvement for every aspect of the
Code Warrior tools running on Mac OS X.
And so,
after we cover what's in Mac OS X,
we're going to cover the
Mac OS X development tools.
And then, once we get the products on
the Pro 7 Early Access CD,
we'll go into the future directions and
how we're going to continue to enable you
to make cool apps for Mac OS X and take
advantage of new Mac OS X technologies.
So first thing and most important
to everyone who's developing
on Mac OS X is debugging,
which was probably the weakest
part of the Code Warrior Pro 6
Mac OS X experience.
So to talk about debugging,
I've got Ken Ryle,
our Director of Debugging Technology.
He's going to cover in-depth what's
new with the Code Warrior Pro 7
Early Access stuff in regards
to Mac OS X debugging.
So, for the past couple of years,
Metrowerk has come to WWDC and
shown you Code Warrior debugging
applications on Mac OS X.
But, of course,
the operating system has evolved since
we shipped the Pro 6 tools last fall.
So, as Matt said in your bag,
everyone's got one of these CDs and
we wanted to update the tools we
shipped last fall so that they
work a lot better with the release,
with the final release of
Mac OS X now that the OS is
out the door and in your hands.
Since most of our developers are
working with Carbon PEP apps,
initially we focused on
improving debugging performance
for CFM Carbon applications.
So, the tools on this CD are faster,
they're more reliable,
and work better than the ones that
we shipped with the Pro 6 tools.
In particular, we worked on improving
debugging of shared libraries.
We worked a lot of our larger
customers that have big applications,
lots of shared libraries.
Big plugin architectures.
And so,
we worked with them to improve the whole
shared library debugging experience
to try and get better performance
and try and approach our real goal,
which is to give you the same kind of
debugging experience on 10 that you've
had on 9 with our tools for years.
We also cleaned up some
things about the tools.
They no longer require some of the
helper apps that we've had before,
like DebugNub or MetroNutBacks
that you may have seen in some
of our tools releases before.
So, we streamlined that process.
We've also been working with
Apple to improve performance.
Earlier,
Dave Payne talked about leveraging
open source for tools on Mac OS X.
And the Code Warrior debugger on 10
uses GDB as the low-level debug service.
So, we've been working closely with
Dave and his team to improve
GDB for our customers as well,
and consequently just improve the
debugging experience on Mac OS X.
So, that's it.
Thank you.
So, we've been doing all those
things for people developing
Carbon PEP applications,
but we've also been
working on Mac O debugging.
Mac O has a different
symbolics format than Carbon,
or rather, PEP applications do.
They use SIM,
which you've seen on the Mac for years,
and Mac O apps use Stabs.
So, on the CD, there's a new plug-in to
Code Warrior that's a Stab
symbolics reader that will let
you debug applications built
with GCC and with our own NUCs.
And with our own Mac O tools
that are also on the CD.
The Mac O debugger isn't as
polished as the PEP debugger is,
but we're going to be working
on both in the future a lot,
and also improving the experience
if you're debugging both binary
formats in the same process.
So, if you have a Mac O application
hosting a CFM bundle and vice versa.
So, that's what's new in
the debugger in this CD.
And we're also going to be
doing more releases over the
summer through our beta program.
There's an email address on the CD that
we'd like for you to contact us at,
let you know your experiences with
this CD and the tools in general,
and let us know how
we're doing with that.
And that way we can update you
with additional debugger components
as we improve them towards our
Pro 7 release later this year.
So, that's our debugging story,
and I'd like to get Matt back up
to tell you about the rest of it.
And I'll tell you about the rest of
the tools on the CD and what we're
going to be working on in the future.
Thanks again.
So, after the bugger,
probably the central tool that you use
the most on Mac OS X will be the new IDE.
The Pro 7 Early Access CD that
you have includes the new 4.2 IDE.
And it has a number of new features to
make Mac OS X development much better.
First and foremost,
it handles untyped files.
With Mac OS X,
Apple has rolled out the support
for non-HFS file systems,
and so you can no longer rely on the
HFS types and creator codes that FSP,
Github, Info gives you back.
So the IDE uses a variety of mechanisms,
including content sniffing to identify
files by what they really are and not
just what the file system says they are.
And so as a consequence,
you can open both the untyped text
files that Apple installs with their dev
tools and also any files on a UFS file.
So that just makes actually looking
at the Mac OS X header files actually
possible now with the CodeWare IDE.
Also, one of our biggest features
for the new 4.2 IDE is support
for Mac OS X frameworks.
You've heard all the Apple guys
talking about frameworks,
which is their new mechanism for
distributing headers and libraries
together in a bundled package.
And the IDE can now use those
to build and link against.
So you can add a framework to your
project and it will show up in
a new tab in the project window.
So for you to see which
frameworks you're using.
And once you've added them,
you're effectively linking against the
Mac OS library that's in the framework.
And so you can use that to get at
both the headers that are provided
by the framework and the library.
And you'll be linking against the library
and you'll get full access to the API.
So through frameworks,
you can get access to all
of the Mac OS only APIs,
such as Quartz, Launch Services,
and some of the other native
APIs that aren't available via Python.
So you can get access to
all of the Mac OS APIs,
such as Quartz, Launch Services,
and some of the other native
APIs that aren't available via Python.
And of course to support
frameworks fully,
Apple has introduced a new include
directive syntax where you qualify
your file name with the framework
name in order to find the actual file.
So for example,
include carbon/carbon.h really
means find Carbon.h wherever it
is within the Carbon framework.
We didn't support that before, we do now.
So you can say include,
use that exact syntax.
And that exact syntax on the screen,
it will compile fine with Code Warrior if
you have your framework set up
and you'll be able to use the,
you'll be able to compile Apple's
headers and use framework notation in
your own include directives as well.
And of course to prevent us to
not break all of your existing
source that's assuming our sort
of flat access path mechanism,
include Carbon.h without the framework
qualifier continues to work so you won't
have to make massive numbers of source
change to your include directives.
directives.
Also for the IDE,
Apple has been talking for, I guess,
over a year now about distributing
applications and binaries in bundles,
which is sort of a magic directory
structure that contains both an
application and all its resources.
So we've added support for
building bundles from the IDE and
all our other various tools.
And in particular,
the IDE has a converter that will
easily update your existing projects
so that they output bundles.
So you can run this simple converter.
It will generate the bundle directory
structure for your target output.
It will create your plist
resource for you based on your
old-style finder BNDL resource.
And it will create
Mac OS targets for your project.
So run this once and you're
ready to go to build a completely
Mac OS X native application.
So MSL has been updated
with a few feature tweaks.
We've added support for
various HFS Plus features,
the most notable of
which is long file names.
So you can use, in MSL now,
you can use file names that
have more than 31 characters.
And when we're building for Mac O,
we don't use MSLC,
we use the ANSI C implementation that
Apple supplies in System.Framework
and our NCC++ application will link
against Apple's implementation and
save you some overhead since Apple's
version is really just a shared library
that's available to all system apps.
So you don't have to build MSLC into
your Mac O applications and waste
a bunch of code in disk space.
The Power Plant has been revved as well.
It now builds for Mac OS.
So you can build your Power Plant for
Mac OS and get complete access
to all of the new native APIs on
Mac OS X that aren't available for PEF.
We fixed a number of Aqua-related
bugs in the Appearance
Manager related code in Power Plant,
so your Power Plant applications will,
in general,
if you're using Appearance Manager,
come out looking much nicer
when running on X now.
And we have a new version of Constructor
that outputs Apple's new recommended
flat resource fork format where the
contents of the resource fork are
actually stored in a files data fork,
so that file can live easily on
flat file systems like UFS and be
transported over the internet easily.
So all those features are in
Power Plant and Constructor now.
The compiler and linker
have been revved as well.
We continue to crank away on
optimizations for the compiler.
With the new high-end PowerMax,
the 667 and 733 megahertz PowerMax,
Apple introduced the
PowerPC 7450 chip from Motorola,
which has a longer pipeline and
enhanced Altebec performance.
And the compiler on the Pro 7 tool
supports optimization specific for
that chip that will make the code
run faster when you target that chip.
The PEF linker has been revved in
a manner similar to our other tools
that deal with resource forks,
so it supports, or resource files,
so it supports flat-file.
resource files, and it supports building
application bundles easily as well.
and we're completely new,
or not a completely new set of tools,
but new tools that are actually beginning
to get into the realm of being very
useful are our Mac O Compiler and Linker.
We've put them before as extremely,
you know,
extremely early access thrill seeker
on past releases and now they're
getting to the point where you can
start using them to build big things.
The Mac O Compiler is exactly
the same C/C++ front end as
our existing PATH compiler.
So really unless you're
using new Mac O API,
you want to use new Mac O APIs,
there's no reason you'll have to
change your source to switch from
PATH to Mac O using code ware.
Our Mac O Linker,
right now we're using an interim
linker that we've developed
in collaboration with Apple.
It's based on Apple's
Darwin open source linker.
It uses stabs for debugger symbolics
like Ken indicated earlier and it's
a bit slower and stabs is quite a
bit bigger and more inconvenient.
It's a bit more convenient
than the SIM symbolics are.
So we're working really hard on a
new MetroWorks Mac O Linker that will
be just as fast as our PATH linker.
We'll use SIM for symbolics
and it will have all the
features that you expect in the,
in a MetroWorks linker.
[Transcript missing]
So future directions.
This is where we're going
with Code Warrior and we
think that it's all solid,
you know, fundamental stuff that
needs to be done for,
you know, to keep you as customers and
to keep you targeting Mac OS X.
First and foremost in the compiler
linker we're going to finish off
our Cocoa and Objective-C support.
We initially added Objective-C syntax
support quite a while ago in the back
in the days of Yellowbox and Rhapsody.
We haven't really gone through a rigorous
validation of that support though.
And we're going to fully validate it,
qualify it, make sure it's, you know,
100% compliant and, you know,
it's fully integrated into our compilers.
We're also, as I mentioned earlier,
working on a new Maco linker based on
our own linker technology and not the
Apple's Darwin open source linker.
It will be, like I said,
inherit a lot of code from
our existing PowerPC linker.
It will be very fast.
It will dead strip unused code that,
you know,
is not called by our application but
is actually included in your project.
And it will output SIM for data.
And it will also be able to debug
your symbolics which are traditionally
much smaller and tighter and
faster to use than Stabs is.
and David So for the IDE,
in the immediate future you'll see
hopefully for the fourth Pro 7 final,
you'll see long file name support.
So you'll no longer have to worry
about headers and sources having
only 31 characters in the file name.
You'll be able to use full 255
character Unicode file names and
have the IDE be able to deal with
those source and header files easily.
We're in the initial planning
stages with Apple about integrating
Code Warrior and Interface Builder
together to provide support for both
Carbon Nib-based development and
Cocoa Objective-C and Java development.
We would like to have
something to show for 7 final.
We may not though,
but it's very interesting to us
and Apple and we intend to fully,
fully explore that avenue
of supporting Cocoa.
And of course we're always
working on our user interface
to make Code Warrior better,
easier and faster to use and we're
always working on performance both
in our own tools and in CodeGen.
so that your software will run
faster when it's built with CodeWare.
The debugger.
Our ultimate goal with the debugger is,
which has been the most
frustrating aspect for people
using our Mac OS X tools so far,
is to make the debugging
experience as smooth and work as
well on Mac OS X as it does on 9.
That being said, we're not there yet with
the 7 Early Access stuff,
but it's gotten a lot,
lot better since 6 and some of
the beta releases that some of
you have probably seen between
6 and the 7 Early Access stuff.
And it's going to get a lot better in the
future and it will be better for 7 and
we're going to keep hitting on it until
it works like you expect it to work.
And even more exciting for the debugger
stuff is that Mac OS X allows us,
because we're using GDB as the
underlying low-level debugger,
and by the way,
you will never see GDB when
using Code Warrior.
You'll be completely isolated from it,
so really the fact that we're
using GDB is a technical detail
that doesn't concern you.
Um... We will be able to do a few
cool new things like adding support
for viewing opaque data types.
Apple rolled out completely
opaque data types in the
Carbon API such that you can't see,
you know, the actual values of the
members of your window pointer,
for example, or you can't see the
contents of a control handle.
Um,
so hopefully we'll be able to integrate
in some support that actually lets
you--tell you what the values of your
control are or what the position of
your window is from the debugger,
even in spite of the fact
that it's an opaque data type.
And another thing,
a long requested feature for our
debugger is support for calling
functions while debugging.
Um, because on Mac OS X, because it's,
you know, Unix and has preemptive
multitasking and protected memory,
we think we'll be able to get
that feature into our debugger,
and you'll be able to just use
function calls and expression
evaluations without any difficulty.
So power plant.
We continue to adopt new
Mac OS technologies and power
plant as rapidly as possible.
With the Appearance Manager,
we gained a lot of Aqua support.
With this release of power plant
that's on the Early Access CD,
we've polished up the
Aqua support a lot more,
so it's a lot cleaner
and easier to deal with.
We have initial support for Carbon events
in the Early Access power plant,
an initial implementation of
a view class to support MLTE,
which is Apple's new text API for
editing both in multibyte lingual
scripts and for greater than 32K editing.
So if you use MLTE,
you'll be safe for localization,
and you'll have a full-featured
text editor that doesn't
have text edits on 32K limit.
And we also have started
investigating a wrapper class in
power plant for the data browser,
which is Apple's new ListView API that
the Mac OS X Finder uses.
So that's it.
On the who to contact thing before
I talk about sending us email,
I'd like to mention that tomorrow
at 12:30 we have our very
own lunch presentation at the
Civic Auditorium across the street.
Lunch will be served there in case you
didn't want to go and not miss lunch.
So if you show up in time,
you should get lunch.
And we'll have a number
of cool things there.
David Perkins,
the president of Metrowerks,
will be talking.
And Berardino Barada, the CTO,
We'll be giving away the PlayStation 2
to somebody at the presentation.
So please show up about that.
You'll learn a lot of great things
about Code Warrior and you'll have
a chance to win a PlayStation 2.
Of course, contact me if you have
questions about Mac OS X tools.
Contact Joe Hayden if you have
And when you start using
the Pro7 Early Access tools,
send your bug reports, feedback,
feature requests,
whatever you want to that email address.
That email address is
actually in the package,
so don't feel obligated to write it down.
And with that,
I'll hand it back over to Godfrey.
Thank you very much, Matt.
The guys at Metrowerks
have really been amazing.
They come to most of our Carbon kitchens.
They support our engineers.
Our engineers support them.
We work tremendous,
tremendous amounts of hours with them.
And I can't thank them enough
for the fantastic job they've
done with the early access.
So again, for more info from Metrowerks,
there's their URL.
And remember the lunch
presentation tomorrow,
12:30 to 1:30 p.m.
Putting it all together,
for Mac OS X development tools
are a very healthy state now.
You saw in Steve Naroff's slide
that we've covered the bases for all
of the work that needs to be done.
Obviously all the tools are young.
All the tools will take more
development and have better features
and more performance as time goes on.
The Apple tool suite is ready now.
It builds all of Mac OS X and all of the
50 or 60 applications that we deliver.
The 3rd party tool developer products are
ready now and there are lots more coming.
So there really isn't any excuse.
The goal is to get your applications to
customers to make Macworld New York and
Apple Expo Paris a tremendous success.
Information Resources at Apple.
We have an information page
for all Mac OS X tools.
All you have to do is go to
that one URL and you can walk
through all of our products and
all of our third party products.
We also support a mailing list server
so you can do self-help with other
members of the development community.
We have mailing lists
for Project Builder,
for Cocoa Dev, for Carbon Dev,
for Java Dev, and several others.
I think about 15 or 20
development-centric lists there.
A roadmap.
This is just the first
session of our tools track.
We're really highlighting tools
throughout WWDC this year.
You can see we have a tremendous
number right here in this
hall today after lunch.
We have Project Builder,
a full detailed feature
presentation on Project Builder.
We have at the same time for
the WebObjects community,
an introduction to the WebObjects
tools over in the civic auditorium.
We have Interface Builder
again here this afternoon.
And then continuing through the week,
tomorrow Project Builder,
Java development tools,
application packaging
and document binding,
compiler technologies,
very important session,
Apple Performance tools.
We want not only your
applications to be there,
we want them to perform at their best.
And our tools can
really help you in that.
All the way through Friday and
we cap the week with a developer
feedback forum on Friday afternoon.
And with that,
we've got about 10 minutes left.
You can contact me if you're a vendor
or if you're just a developer and you
need to know something about tools,
this is my contact information.
If you want to give feedback to
the Apple Tool Developer Group,
Developer Tool Group, excuse me,
there's a mass mailing address
for us to receive your input.